---
layout: page
title: Background
permalink: background
show-title: true
---

**bold text** INTRODUCTION TO REVOLUTIONARLY GEORGIA: 
  Well after the 1783 Treaty of Paris, a reflective John Adams wrote to his friend Hezekiah Niles about what caused the American Revolution. In his letter, he laid out his argument for what bonded the colonies into a nation, stating, “Thirteen clocks were made to strike together — a perfection of mechanism which no artist had ever before effected.”  While quite poetic, it begs the question, why only thirteen clocks? In 1770, one of these metaphorical clocks published an anonymous news article condemning South Carolina’s General Committee members as “all without abilities and some of the desperate fortune who have acquired the specious name of Patriots and are at this day idolized by the blind and misguided multitude.” This General Committee, which received so much criticism, was established by several Charlestown merchants as an independent governing body that resolved to boycott all British goods in protest of the recent Townshend Acts. “Those pretended Patriots” actions are branded as treasonous and disloyal to England and its laws. The article concludes by reaffirming the colony’s loyalty to Great Britain, stating “that we, despite the General Committee and their resolutions, submitting to all the King’s loyal subjects whether their conduct is most INFAMOUS or that of the Georgians.” Despite the criticism of the General Committee, this paradoxical loyalty sets the stage for investigating the factors that propelled Georgia towards revolution.  
  The aforementioned article cannot represent all Georgian's sentiments as they would establish their own general committee in 1775 and conform to the same policy of non-importation, which was considered treasonous in 1770. Therefore, why was Georgia’s revolutionary clock off time from its northern sister colonies? Even more pertinent is what ultimately changed to send such a young colony to break from the British Empire and sign a declaration of independence. Many historians consider Georgia’s path to revolution as a combination of personal power struggles encouraged by outside influences. This understanding shows that revolutionary Georgia was compelled by its northern colonies into rebelling. In his book The American Revolution in Georgia, Kenneth Colman argues that “there would certainly have been no revolution had it been left to Georgians to begin!”  More recent scholarship has focused on patriot figures such as Lachlan McIntosh, Jonathan Bryan, and Button Gwinnett to reveal a group of men more interested in personal quarrels than political thought.  These arguments present a revolution that is devoid of ideology and more opportunistic. While not entirely untrue, it misses the radical change happening within the young colony. With the end of the Seven Years War Georgia began to experience unprecedented growth. This rapid expansion of territory, population, and economy left a colony without any unifying identity. As Massachusetts and other colonies' woes intensified through the 1770s, Georgians began to use the ideology of revolution to establish a national identity founded on local representation. Georgias' unique experience in the decade leading to the American Revolution exemplifies how malleable the patriot ideology could be. Georgia may not have started a war on their own, but their ultimate participation speaks to a radically developing colony searching for an identity. 
**bold text** ECONOMIC BOOM OF 1760s:
  Being one of the youngest mainland colonies, only beating East and West Florida in age as a British colony, Georgia can often be overlooked. Buttressing South Carolina, which amounts to a relatively insignificant population size compared to the northern colonies, some considered Georgia an extension of South Carolina. Even after it defied its earlier loyalist sentiment and joined the American Revolution, many saw this colony as just the Carolina backcountry. This feeling of insignificance is echoed in a travel guide of the British colonies in North America published in 1777. Many of the colonies are given in-depth descriptions of “their divisions, chief towns, principal capes, bays, harbours, rivers, & coasts. With the climate, soil, productions, and different kinds of animals.”  In this description, the American colonies are given their own section or are combined due to their closeness in name, such as North and South Carolina and East and West Florida. Nevertheless, Georgia, which has no name association and yet is listed with North and South Carolina, suggests some broader connection between Georgia and the Carolinas. To accentuate its insignificance, Georgia is only outrightly referred to in a paragraph that praises Savannah’s advantageous location “for a foreign and inland trade.” It then briefly acknowledges Augusta as a trading post with its Cherokee and Creek neighbors. The proceeding description either lumps Georgia as synonymous with the Carolinas or outright ignores it altogether. While this lack of attention may reflect its readers' presuppositions of Georgia's importance to the people living in the colony leading up to the revolution, they would have seen a vibrant, growing colony. A large part of the economic expansion was Savannah's role as a trade port. While advantageously positioned to be a suitable trade port, many early settlers in Savannah complained that they could not establish any consistent exports due to the extremely high labor costs in Georgia.  
  Lifting the ban on slavery consequentially made exporting products such as rice, indigo, livestock, and lumber more attractive. By legalizing slavery, Savannah saw the arrival of slave ships. According to records from the British Naval Office and the Georgia Gazette, the initial inbound merchant vessels arrived from South Carolina and the West Indies.  This soon developed into a symbiotic relationship as Georgia began to export to the Caribbean while importing slaves from South Carolina. This regional trade increased, as Savannah customs officials cleared 217 vessels in 1772 compared to only 58 in 1763.  Rice was an apparent export to the West Indies as Georgia’s low country was ideal for the crop, as the Caribbean islands devoted themselves entirely to cultivating sugar and other cash crops. Nevertheless, this did not make Georgia particularly any more unique than other mainland colonies such as South Carolina. What this young colony did have to offer was lumber. Specifically longleaf pine which was particularly resistant to decay and fire making it an attractive material for building material and navel construction.  Establishing this trade with the West Indies resulted in more mixed trade between the two regions. The lumber trade was so important to Savannah merchants that when the Stamp Act was passed, Georgians took issue with its “’ incumbrance’ on the exportation of lumber that required a bond double the value of the lumber until the cargo was sold.”  Longleaf pine was so widely used within Georgia’s growing trade that Button Gwinnett, one of three representatives to sign the Declaration of Independence, briefly traded lumber with the West Indies. Like many other newcomers to Georgia, he was attracted to this trade, which created a large enough community that by the 1770s, Savannah officials were looking to establish its own chamber of commerce.  This period saw a significant shift, which established Savannah as a merchant town. 
**bold text** Slavery:
 After lengthy debates and a healthy amount of pressure from aspiring South Carolina planters, Georgia legalized slavery in 1750. Immediately after lifting the ban on slavery, several planters moved in and gained land on the coastal islands surrounding Savannah. This simultaneously saw an explosion of enslaved labor. By 1773, enslaved African Americans made up forty-five percent of the colony’s total population.  They were coerced mainly into coastal plantations, which produced cash crops such as rice, indigo, and some tobacco. These plantations consisted primarily of the coastal parishes of Christ Church, St. Philip, St. John, St. Andrew, and St. James. Historian Betty Wood states, “Around five percent of landowners controlled twenty percent of the lands by the early 1770s.”  This plantation economy produced a small, wealthy elite class more in line with the West Indies and South Carolina. The wealth from these plantations became the foundation of wealth in the colony. But more important than their exports were the enslaved people themselves. 
There can be no doubt that slavery transformed Royal Georgia society. As mentioned by Governor Wright in a letter explaining the condition of the colony, over 15 thousand African Americans lived in Georgia.  Their labor was primarily used to cultivate the aforementioned cash crops. However, they participated in almost every aspect of Georgian economic life as they were tradesmen, builders, and artisans.  Already, by the dawn of the revolution, slavery had become engaged in almost all aspects of Colonial Georgia life. However, as most plantations were located in the coastal region, which was best suited for cultivating rice, most enslaved people resided around Savannah. Owning a plantation and slaves, therefore, solidified economic and political status within the colony. Whether political standing led to the ownership of land and slaves in the colony or the other way around, being a part of the planter class typically meant they also had political capital. A prime example of this was Governor Wright who owned twenty-six thousand acres of land with five hundred and twenty-two slaves.  In addition to the governor, many of the pre-war planter class were established members of the royal authority, the best example being John Graham, Lieutenant Governor of Georgia. Graham purchased Mulberry Grove, one of the most extensive rice plantations in Colonial Georgia, in 1774.  While already established as a member of the King’s Council, Graham established further political authority by obtaining such a substantial plantation. However, while these small numbers of elites would mostly stay loyal throughout the 1770s, as can be seen by the number of claims Georgia loyalists made after the war to compensate for their loss of slaves, the planter class was by no means homogeneous in its feelings on joining the Revolution.  The two most glaring examples of this separation between the planter elites are Lachlan McIntosh and Johnathan Bryan, who both owned large plantations in St. James parish and Savannah, respectively. Setting these two aside, many planters looked to Great Britain to protect their holding during this period of rapid development. However, as their economic prospects grew, Georgia’s territorial claims expanded.         
As Georgia transitioned from a dependent buffer zone to an economically independent British colony, the emerging opportunities that came with this development brought many to Georgia's shores. As the number of slaves in the colony increased, so too did the arrival of white immigrants. Georgia's white population tripled in numbers in just the ten years following the end of the Seven Years' War.  However, what separates Georgia from other American colonies is its abundance of available lands east of the proclamation line of 1763. As Kenneth Coleman states, “The colony had not yet settled far enough for the proclamation line to be an immediate hindrance to westward expansion.”  For Governor Wright, the land cessions of 1763 had as much to do with establishing trade agreements between the Creek and Cherokee as it was to expand territory. This is not to say that gaining new lands was of no importance to Georgia; quite the opposite, but in a frontier colony such as Georgia, peaceful relations with its Native American neighbors were of the utmost importance. While there was some violence between new settlers in the land acquired by the land cession of 1763 and Native communities by the close of the 1760s, relations were peaceful.   It was not until the following land cession of 1773 that relations became hostile again, particularly with the Creek. While rising tensions with the Creek could signify growing uncertainty among Georgians, their concern about violence with the Creek was overshadowed by the political fight for representation within these newly established parishes. 
With the looming imperial crisis finding itself at the doorstep of Georgia, the economic expansion of the past ten years showed that not all was bleak in the eyes of Georgians. In a sermon delivered by the famous evangelical pastor Geroge Whitfield, he commends “this once despised, deserted province” for its economic transformation, reminding Georgians that just thirty years ago, “lands which now sell for three pounds might have been purchased for three shillings.”  Many would credit Governor Wright's leadership and the British Empire for the source of their growth; however, this rapid development, accompanied by events starting to take shape in New England, would begin to apply new pressure on this young colony.

**bold text** CULTURAL TIES: 
 The combination of Georgia’s emerging merchants and expanding planter class shows a striking similarity to Caribbean culture. It is no secret that the planter elites modeled themselves after the exorbitantly wealthy absentee planters of the Caribbean. The most striking similarity is Georgia’s growing obsession with cultivating rice and indigo. The rush to expand and dominate these crops kept Georgia’s plantations from establishing any kind of economic diversification. By the dawn of the revolution, Georgia's racial laws, occupational structure, and dominating trade made Savannah look more like a Caribbean colony than those on the mainland. 
 If in the years leading towards the revolution Georgia was modeling itself more as a Caribbean style colony the obvious question of why Georgia looked north rather than south for a national identity. To begin to answer that question requires evaluating where Georgia differentiates from the British Caribbean colonies. With Georgia’s class structure and economic model emulating the sugar islands of the Caribbean, both economies were dependent on the importation and pacification of slaves. Any economy built on slave labor where the slave population rivals the non-enslaved poses constant fear to the enslaver of rebellion. This fact was not lost on Georgians, as their laws regarding enslaved people reflected their fear of such an uprising. The Slave Codes of 1755 required all slaves traveling alone to either be accompanied by a white chaperone or carry a pass signed by their enslaver. They prohibited more than seven enslaved people from traveling together, and the use of any “drums, horns or other loud instruments which may call together or give sign or notice to one another of their ‘wicked’ designs” was forbidden.  As a latecomer to the institution relative to its neighbors, its slave codes were heavily influenced by South Carolina and the West Indies. 
  The similarities of slave codes further represent a broader cultural fear found in the Caribbean and the southern mainland colonies. However, while each colony devoted much of its time and resources to maintaining its domination out of fear of a slave uprising, Georgia's economic youth played a significant factor in allowing it to challenge the very power that maintained the delicate balance between enslaved and enslaver. We start to see the divergence by comparing the population percentages between Georgia and the West Indies. It is estimated that by the end of the 1770s, Barbados maintained a 4 to 1 ratio of enslaved people, with slaves outnumbering the white population 12 to 1 in St. Kitts. By far, the highest disproportion in all of British America was Antigua’s staggering 15 slaves to every white colonist.  Antigua, in particular, required a regiment of British soldiers to maintain order and suppress revolts. British military and economic support were paramount for these small island colonies. Compare this to Georgia's less than 1 to 1 ratio, with Governor Wright stating by 1774 that the current estimated enslaved population was fifteen thousand to their eighteen thousand white population.  While still a significant aspect of the population, Georgia lacked the same dependency on British military assistance as the Caribbean islands required. In this regard, a parallel can be made between Georgia’s and South Carolina’s demographic situation concerning its enslaved population. In John Drayton’s View of South Carolina, he argues similarly that South Carolina’s influx of white settlers to the backcountry “added thousands to her domestic strength.” Just as in Georgia and South Carolina, the white population was around even with its enslaved, allowing her to have the “domestic strength” to consider revolution.  Ultimately, Georgia's larger domestic white population allowed it to feel more emboldened to both maintain its burgeoning institution of slavery while continuing to pressure royal authority. 

